.TH DOXYGEN "1" "@DATE@" "doxygen @VERSION@" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
Doxygen \- documentation system for various programming languages
.SH DESCRIPTION
Doxygen is a documentation system for C++, C, Java, Objective-C, IDL
(CORBA and Microsoft flavors), Fortran, Python, VHDL and to some extent PHP, C#, and D.
.PP
You can use Doxygen in several ways:
.TP
1) Generate a template configuration file*:
.IP
doxygen [-s] \fB\-g\fR [configName]
.TP
2) Update an existing configuration file*:
.IP
doxygen [-s] \fB\-u\fR [configName]
.TP
3) Generate documentation using an existing configuration file*:
.IP
doxygen [configName]
.TP
4) Generate a template file that controls the layout of the generated documentation:
.IP
doxygen \fB\-l\fR [layoutFileName]
.IP
.RS 0
   If layoutFileName is omitted, DoxygenLayout.xml will be used as the filename.
   If - is used for layoutFileName, Doxygen writes to standard output.
.RE
.TP
5) Generate a template style sheet file for RTF, HTML or LaTeX:
.IP
RTF:
doxygen \fB\-w\fR rtf styleSheetFile
.IP
HTML:
doxygen \fB\-w\fR html headerFile footerFile styleSheetFile [configFile]
.IP
LaTeX:
doxygen \fB\-w\fR latex headerFile footerFile styleSheetFile [configFile]
.TP
6) Generate an RTF extensions file:
.IP
RTF:
doxygen \fB\-e\fR rtf extensionsFile
.IP
.RS 0
   If - is used for extensionsFile Doxygen will write to standard output.
.RE
.TP
7) Compare the used configuration file with the template configuration file:
.IP
doxygen \fB\-x\fR [configFile]
.TP
   Compare the used configuration file with the template configuration file
.RS 0
   without replacing the environment variables or CMake type replacement variables:
.RE
.IP
doxygen \fB\-x_noenv\fR [configFile]
.TP
8) Show a list of built-in emojis.
.IP
doxygen \fB\-f\fR emoji outputFileName
.IP
.RS 0
   If - is used for outputFileName Doxygen will write to standard output.
.RE
.PP
.RS 0
*) If \fB\-s\fR is specified, the comments of the configuration items in the config file will be omitted.
   If configName is omitted, 'Doxyfile' will be used by default.
   If - is used for configFile, Doxygen will write / read the configuration to / from standard output / input.
.RE
.PP
If \fB\-q\fR is used for a Doxygen documentation run, Doxygen will see this as if QUIET=YES has been set.
.PP
\fB\-v\fR print version string, \fB\-V\fR print extended version information
.PP
\fB\-h\fR,\fB\-?\fR prints usage help information
.PP
doxygen \fB\-d\fR prints additional usage flags for debugging purposes
.PP
.SH AUTHOR
Doxygen version @VERSION@, Copyright Dimitri van Heesch 1997-@YEAR@
.SH SEE ALSO
doxywizard(1).
